Why do models deteriorate.
Now this is going to be an interesting tutorial because I can't just simply give you a blueprint or
framework here because it can be literally a myriad of reasons why models did it.
Nevertheless we're going to throw around some ideas so that you can see where which way to think.
When you see the traditional model so maybe you will find the reason.
All right.
So we saw this we saw that a new model in 18 months can easily go from 81 percent you know rule of thumb
assessment to 63 percent.
What could be the reasons.
Well let's have a look at some possible reasons additional factors for instance your model includes
only some verbals And then there is actually another variable that appears that doesn't include a good
example would be say in a factory you've got a model that measures that predicts defects but then you
add a new component to your element that you're producing.
So whether it's a tooth brush or something else whatever you're producing a car.
So you want to fire you've added a new variable component but that variables obviously not include your
model because it was built before that variable was added another one could be changes in behavior so
if we're modeling the behavior of human beings like in the example the bank people might change the
behavior why they change the behavior.
That's a different question.
It could be it could be a result of something else so that's like another effect that caused the change
of the behavior.
For example when smartphones came out they became so popular very quickly that maybe people all started
banking with their smartphones and they don't like the color of your bank's app or your bank doesn't
have an app something that changes in process so going back to the factory example.
Maybe now your toothbrushes are being produced in a different way so maybe you've changed the conveyor
belt somewhere or maybe you have excluded an additional step from the actual process of manufacturing
.
And that wasn't taken into account in your model previously and now it's not performing as well.
Changes in existing factors going back to the example which are jumping around with examples here going
back to the example of customers in a bank maybe the distribution of ages of your customers changed
.
So with tieless good one time customers get older and maybe obviously not as quickly as 18 months but
maybe a couple of years because their customer base has gotten older and you haven't done anything to
maintain that distribution curve as you had when you created the model and which is which can be fine
maybe you're not aiming to get younger customers maybe you started as a young bank or a new bank and
then your customers customers naturally aged over the period of five or 10 years and now obviously their
behaviors are different.
Their distribution of their age is different and therefore your model hasn't been adapted to the new
customer base.
So that could be a reason that's actually a good example because people get older the time.
Models will also get older and people's behavior changes.
And also the actual distribution of the variable age has changed.
Whereas the model is expecting a different type of distribution.
So there you go.
That could be a reason competitor or maybe a competitor entered the market or multiple competitors have
been entering the market and they have been changing things or they have been taking a share of your
customers or more customers have been leaving disproportionately more to what the model is expecting
changes in the industry.
That also could be to do with competitors or maybe something say in your product has been introduced
in the industry or maybe there's been a lot of consolidation in the street in the industry and other
major players that are crowd that customers are gravity gravitating towards or the opposite maybe because
companies have broken down into little ones or maybe it has been acquisitions or mergers or something
like that that some something in this show you would know this if you have the intrinsic knowledge and
you on top of things and something changes drastically or even slowly over time but still drastically
you would hear about it and you would think that maybe that is causing the change in Malaysia.
You will know what I'm talking about when you when you come across it when you see a change in the industry
and you see it effect your model or you see a change in your model you will link the two.
It's not.
It's sometimes very obvious when this happens changes in regulation.
That's a good one because it can actually really impact a model very quickly.
Let's say something change in the regulations overnight and now a process has changed the way you do
things has changed it has become different.
For instance previously in order to get people to perform an action which you're measuring with this
model you had to send them direct mail so you had to send them physical mail to get them to do something
.
Let's say it was to get their phone number.
You don't have their phone number and you want their phone number.
And this model is predicting the likelihood of people giving you their phone number.
So previously in order to according to regulation in order to get their phone number you had to send
them direct mail physically.
But now the regulation has changed and you can send them electronic direct communications right idioms
and they can reply by e-mail and give you their phone number that way of course it's going to be easier
to get their phone numbers and therefore your model is not going to be performing as well because it's
not used to this drastic change.
It was expected.
It's built for direct mails your or direct communications.
Now you're sending a challenger communications completely different situation.
You have to rebuild the model changes in product.
That's there's another one maybe you're predicting how likely people are of obtaining a search product
and then you release another product which is cannibalizing the demand for the first product.
So you're kind of competing with yourself and the model doesn't take that into account so the model
was built in the circumstance where we were.
We are trying to understand here is that the image I'm trying to the message I'm trying to convey is
that the model and model is built in a certain environment.
It is nurtured grown and deployed in a certain environment.
If the environment changes then the model might break.
It might stop working.
These things are very fragile.
They can only work there.
They're very powerful and strong when they work in the environment that where they were created as soon
as something about the environment changes the more models can deteriorate and even break depletion
.
Haha that's that's an interesting one.
If a model over time has used up the customers or the elements that it's modeling.
So it's kind of it's kind of a vicious vicious cycle here so it doesn't apply always doesn't apply to
almost only some situations so when you say you want to you want some action which is a one off action
you can get that person that can repeat purchase or you can't get him.
You don't even need to get him to do that actually.
It's like that for example of providing a mobile number once you have the mobile number.
That's it.
That person's out of the out of the equation and perhaps you have you know our customer base is not
growing that quickly and say you create a model on a a small sample like 10000 people.
You created this model and then you want to apply it to your whole population.
Well after you've applied it once and you've sent out the communications to get those phone numbers
and you've gotten them from the most probable people to give them to you.
That's it.
When you if you apply the model again your population has changed right you you're not going to apply
it to those people that already gave you a mobile number so you can apply to those that did it and therefore
your model is not going to perform the same way because you've already depleted that potential for people
to view mobile which is actually a good thing.
So you've actually gotten the phone numbers just the thing is that you can reapply them moral not just
so.
Situations like that can occur.
Be be careful of those.
And number 10 what I think of your spontaneous changes I'll get this is an interesting one.
Something in the industry company behavior regulations product any of these happen like very very quickly
and unexpectedly.
Why brought this one up because I wanted to show you as a bonus two additional examples of model titration
.
These are going to be a bit weird and they can be funny and they're going to be a bit challenging to
understand so let's go ahead.
So Example Number one is this one what do you think happened here.
What does this look like to you.
It looks weird right.
It's you wouldn't think that the red line can be both above and below the blue line.
But let me explain what happened here and I'm going to use my Mosse for this because this is important
.
So when you see something like this obviously something happened something went wrong.
It's not just like gradual deterioration like this over time.
This was like a spontaneous kind of thing.
So what actually in fact happened here is the the way kind of to determine this is a look at the area
under the I remember long time ago a couple sections ago we were talking about that the correct mathematical
actually accuracy ratio is defined as the area under this model over here divided by the area under
the perfect model which we can see over here.
And what we're using is just a rule of thumb because it's faster and it's very visual.
So look at that area and the curve here.
What do you see.
You see that the area under the curve has decreased.
Right.
So the more there's less area under the curve.
What this is telling us is that the model is not predicting as many turners and in this particular case
what exactly happened is the number of Turners drastically increased.
And if you might be a bit weird to look at it this way but look at look what's happening so the most
predicting prediction predicting is still predicting even though it's going under the blue curve doesn't
matter.
It's still predicting that people are leaving so as this is growing you are growing here.
So as long as you're going up here that means you're getting more turners or more people that actually
left.
So just get of here.
Then you have this drastic move.
Bam very quickly.
So basically here you are.
Every single time you take a person from the horizontal axis you're picking up a lever.
An actual Tzschirner.
Then you pick up another person.
He's also 10 or so here.
It's every single time.
It's spot on.
You're hitting a person that's leaving.
And then it starts predicting again of some sort of rate.
So what is this is telling us is that before it looked like this before there was just a normal curve
here so as you were picking up like a certain number of people some of them were burner's some of them
are like people who left the company.
Some of them weren't.
But here they all became lever's of the come from the company.
So what this is telling us is something drastic change in the industry that all these people that used
to be here now all of a sudden have left or all of these people that's all this classification the people
that were placed here according to the models classification have not left a good example of that is
a categorical variable like let's say country let's say we have three countries right in our daughter
data set and let's say all of these people are from Germany and these people are from France and these
people say of course the model doesn't do that.
But if there is a very distinct difference between the regions they might end up grouped together so
that if everybody from Germany is much more likely to live than people from France and they're much
more likely to leave than people from Spain then that's how the money is going to structure it so that
just the progression will put people from Germany at the start then people from France and people are
saying and then what happens here.
Everybody from France decides to leave the bank.
That's it.
Maybe that's a good example of change in regulation maybe they're not allowed to bank with your bank
anymore.
That's it.
Your bank has been prohibited of working in France.
They all everybody in France is going to leave your bank.
And that's what we're seeing here.
That's why as soon as the model gets to the people that did it you previously placed in this part which
were both from France and were kind of like a monetary risk of leaving.
Now they're all leaving spontaneously and as you can see that is blowing up the model.
So what would you do in this case.
Well first of all if that is if you know the exact reason and you can see that there's this categorical
wearable of course you would excluded from your maudling because you would treat them separately.
You would you would treat the population of the bank or the people at bankruptcy in France who treat
them separately because there's no point in modeling them they're all going to leave anyway.
You already know that.
What's the point in putting them in a model if it's not such a drastic change you just rebuild the model
and you would try it.
I see how that a comma is can be accommodated by the model.
The other one we're going to look at is also a bit weird.
What do you think happened here.
And this is a great example actually of the fact that you can't always use the rule of thumb you can
use the rule of thumb when morals are like normal like that when this happens.
Look at this model.
So here you can see that at 50 percent.
This is by the way this is the same model.
This model is the same as this model in which you can see here is that at 50 percent.
This model is actually predicting a lot more so like nearly 89 percent.
So the this rule of thumb assessment has gone up really well so this looks like a much better model
if you assess it that way.
But what is happening in reality is if you get over here this is the most predicting predicting predicting
.
And then once we get over here to these people that were placed somewhere between 60 percent and 80
percent.
So you get to these people.
You're not picking up any libbers none of them are actually leaving the company or none of them are
performing that action that you're measuring.
So similar to this situation but the opposite here they all decided to leave here.
Everybody in France decided to stay.
Once again could be a regulation could be a new product could be.
Maybe there were only.
There were only two banks in France and one of them one of them just closed down.
And that said you're the only one so everybody had to stay.
It could be anything.
But once again the in this case something happened something major happened and you can see that your
model broke.
So in this situation I wouldn't measure it with this rule of thumb.
In fact I would do something about this categorical bearable because it is definitely doing something
wrong to the model.
And also you have to rebuild or retrain them all.
Speaking of rebuilding and retraining That's our next topic now that we know what it looks like when
models deteriorate and why they can deteriorate.
How.
It's about time that we talked about maintaining our models and making sure that they're nice and fresh
all the time.
And we will talk about that in the next tutorial